JAX Docs tutorials: quickstart (#18613)
jax-ml/jax: docs/tutorials/quickstart.md

---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.15.2
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Quickstart

> **JAX is a library for array-oriented numerical computation (*a la* [NumPy](https://numpy.org/)), with automatic differentiation and JIT compilation to enable high-performance machine learning research**.

Reviewer: Nit: Use more accessible language for readers who don't know this French expression:

```suggestion
**JAX is a library for array-oriented numerical computation (like [NumPy](https://numpy.org/)), with automatic differentiation and JIT compilation to enable high-performance machine learning research**.
```

> This document gives a quick overview of essential JAX features:

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
This document provides a quick overview of essential JAX features, so you can get started with JAX quickly:
```

WDYT>

> * JAX provides a unified NumPy-like interface to computations that run on CPU, GPU, or TPU, in single-host or distributed settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* JAX provides a unified NumPy-like interface to computations that run on CPU, GPU, or TPU, in local or distributed settings.
```

> * JAX features built-in Just-In-Time compilation via [Open XLA](https://github.com/openxla), an open-source machine learning compiler ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* JAX features built-in Just-In-Time (JIT) compilation via [Open XLA](https://github.com/openxla), an open-source machine learning compiler ecosystem.
```

> * JAX programs support efficient evaluation of gradients via its automatic differentiation transformations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* JAX functions support efficient evaluation of gradients via its automatic differentiation transformations.
```

@mattjj may have proposed a similar change elsewhere in the doc (JAX programs -> JAX functions)

> * JAX programs can be automatically vectorized to efficiently map custom kernels across batches.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* JAX functions can be automatically vectorized to efficiently map them over arrays representing batches of inputs.
```

## Installation

> JAX can be installed for CPU on Linux, Windows, and OSX directly from the [Python Package Index](https://pypi.org/project/jax/):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JAX can be installed for CPU on Linux, Windows, and macOS directly from the [Python Package Index](https://pypi.org/project/jax/):
```

```
pip install "jax[cpu]"
```

> For more detailed installation information, including installation with GPU support, sett {ref}`installation`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more detailed installation information, including installation with GPU support, see {ref}`installation`.
```

> For more detailed installation information, including installation with GPU support, see {ref}`installation`.

Reviewer: Nit: Use more accessibility-friendly language, as not every reader can "see" (they can "read", for example).

```suggestion
For more detailed installation information, including installation with GPU and TPU support, refer to {ref}`installation`.
```

## JAX as NumPy

Most JAX usage is through the familiar {mod}`jax.numpy` API, which is typically imported under the `jnp` alias:

```{code-cell}
import jax.numpy as jnp
```

With this import, you can immediately use JAX in a similar manner to typical NumPy programs,
including using NumPy-style array creation functions, Python functions and operators, and
array attributes and methods:

```{code-cell}
def selu(x, alpha=1.67, lmbda=1.05):
  return lmbda * jnp.where(x > 0, x, alpha * jnp.exp(x) - alpha)

x = jnp.arange(5.0)
print(selu(x))
```

You'll find a few differences between JAX arrays and NumPy arrays once you begin digging-in;
these are explored in  [🔪 JAX - The Sharp Bits 🔪](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notebooks/Common_Gotchas_in_JAX.html).

> ## Using {func}`~jax.jit` to speed up functions

Reviewer 2: Maybe in this section's header, or maybe just at the end of its body, we should call out automatic parallelization over multiple devices. We don't want to bury the lede too much!

JAX runs transparently on the GPU or TPU (falling back to CPU if you don't have one). However, in the above example, JAX is dispatching kernels to the chip one operation at a time. If we have a sequence of operations, we can use the `@jit` decorator to compile multiple operations together using XLA.

We can use IPython's `%timeit` to quickly benchmark our `selu` function, using `block_until_ready()` to

> account for JAX's dynamic dispatch (See {ref}`async-dispatch`):

Reviewer: Nit: Use more accessibility-friendly language.

```suggestion
account for JAX's dynamic dispatch (refer to {ref}`async-dispatch`):
```

```{code-cell}
from jax import random

key = random.key(1701)
x = random.normal(key, (1_000_000,))
%timeit selu(x).block_until_ready()
```

> (notice we've used {mod}`jax.random` to generate some random numbers; for details on how to generate random
> numbers in JAX, see {ref}`pseudorandom-numbers`).
> 

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
Notice we used {mod}`jax.random` to generate some random numbers. For details on how to generate random
numbers in JAX, check out {ref}`pseudorandom-numbers`).

```

> We can speed the execution of this function with `@jit`, which will jit-compile the first time `selu` is called and will be cached thereafter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can speed up the execution of this function with `@jit`, which will JIT-compile the first time `selu` is called and be cached thereafter.
```

```{code-cell}
from jax import jit

selu_jit = jit(selu)
_ = selu_jit(x)  # compiles on first call
%timeit selu_jit(x).block_until_ready()
```

The above timing represent execution on CPU, but the same code can be run on GPU or TPU for
an even greater speedup.

> For more on JIT compilation in JAX, see {ref}`jit-compilation`.

Reviewer: it: Use more accessibility-friendly language.

```suggestion
For more on JIT compilation in JAX, check out {ref}`jit-compilation`.
```

## Taking derivatives with {func}`~jax.grad`

> In addition to evaluating numerical functions, we also want to transform them.

Reviewer: Maybe:

```suggestion
In addition to evaluating numerical functions, we can also to transform them.
```

> One transformation is [automatic differentiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_differentiation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One transformation is [automatic differentiation (autodiff)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_differentiation).
```

Since we're using the shortened version later.

                   for v in jnp.eye(len(x))])

print(first_finite_differences(sum_logistic, x_small))
```

The {func}`~jax.grad` and {func}`~jax.jit` transformations compose and can be mixed arbitrarily.
In the above example we jitted `sum_logistic` and then took its derivative. We can go further:

```{code-cell}
print(grad(jit(grad(jit(grad(sum_logistic)))))(1.0))
```

For more advanced autodiff, you can use {func}`jax.vjp` for reverse-mode vector-Jacobian products and {func}`jax.jvp` for forward-mode Jacobian-vector products.
The two can be composed arbitrarily with one another, and with other JAX transformations.
Here's one way to compose them to make a function that efficiently computes full Hessian matrices:

```{code-cell}
from jax import jacfwd, jacrev
def hessian(fun):
  return jit(jacfwd(jacrev(fun)))
print(hessian(sum_logistic)(x_small))
```

This kind of composition produces efficient code in practice; this is more-or-less how JAX's built-in {func}`jax.hessian` function is implemented.

For more on automatic differentiation in JAX, see {ref}`automatic-differentiation`.

## Auto-vectorization with {func}`~jax.vmap`

> JAX has one more transformation in its API that you might find useful: {func}`~jax.vmap`, the vectorizing map.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another useful transformation is {func}`~jax.vmap`, the vectorizing map.
```

> Another useful transformation is {func}`~jax.vmap`, the vectorizing map.

Reviewer: Nit

```suggestion
Another useful JAX transformation is {func}`~jax.vmap`, the vectorizing map.
```

  return jnp.dot(mat, v)
```

Given a function such as `apply_matrix`, we can loop over a batch dimension in Python, but usually the performance of doing so is poor.

```{code-cell}
def naively_batched_apply_matrix(v_batched):
  return jnp.stack([apply_matrix(v) for v in v_batched])

print('Naively batched')
%timeit naively_batched_apply_matrix(batched_x).block_until_ready()
```

We know how to batch this operation manually.
In this case, `jnp.dot` handles extra batch dimensions transparently.

```{code-cell}
@jit
def batched_apply_matrix(v_batched):
  return jnp.dot(v_batched, mat.T)

print('Manually batched')
%timeit batched_apply_matrix(batched_x).block_until_ready()
```

However, suppose we had a more complicated function without batching support. We can use {func}`~jax.vmap` to add batching support automatically.

```{code-cell}
from jax import vmap

@jit
def vmap_batched_apply_matrix(v_batched):
  return vmap(apply_matrix)(v_batched)

print('Auto-vectorized with vmap')
%timeit vmap_batched_apply_matrix(batched_x).block_until_ready()
```

Of course, {func}`~jax.vmap` can be arbitrarily composed with {func}`~jax.jit`, {func}`~jax.grad`, and any other JAX transformation.

> For more on automatic vectorization in JAX, see {ref}`automatic-vectorization`.

Reviewer: Nit: Use more accessibility-friendly language.

```suggestion
For more on automatic vectorization in JAX, check {ref}`automatic-vectorization`.
```

> This is just a taste of what JAX can do. We're really excited to see what you do with it!

Reviewer: Maybe we could add the next steps (each of the {transform name} 101s).

```
## Next steps

Discover more about each of the transforms you learned about in this Quickstart by...

- ... 101
- ... 101
- ... 101
```
